=pod

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

Accounting::Kitty::Util - Utility functions for Accounting::Kitty

=head1 SYNOPSIS

   use Accounting::Kitty::Util qw< int2dec round >;

   my $dec = int2dec(10000, 2); # returns 100.00

   my $defect = round(123.40); # returns 123
   my $excess = round(123.60); # returns 124

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This module contains utility functions that might come handy when using
L<Accounting::Kitty>. In particular, they allow you to cope easily with
the constraint of working with integer values only.

=head1 FUNCTIONS

=head2 B<< int2dec >>

   my $dec = int2dec($int, $decimals);

Get a decimal representation of the input C<$int> considering
C<$decimals> positions. For example, the following:

   int2dec(12345, 3)

returns C<12.345>, i.e. the original C<12345> transformed considering
three decimal digits.

The output number is returned as a string actually, so it should be safe
against possible obscure rounding tricks. It will remain as such until
you use it as a number, though.

=head2 B<< round >>

   my $int = round($float);

round the input C<$float> to the closer integer. Number whose decimal
part is less than C<0.5> are rounded towards the floor, otherwise they
are rounded to the ceiling.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<Accounting::Kitty>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Flavio Poletti <polettix@cpan.org>

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

Copyright (C) 2016 by Flavio Poletti <polettix@cpan.org>

This module is free software. You can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the Artistic License 2.0.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
without any warranty; without even the implied warranty of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose.

=cut
